---
layout: post
title: Detection and Classification of Dental Panoramics with Mask R-CNNs
subtitle: Automating the Analysis of Dental X-Rays.
author: Mehdi Amine
---

## Introduction

At the time in which this post is being written, I still consider this project my greatest work. I describe here the objectives, the techniques and the achievements. 

After introducing the objectives, the article covers the primary resource: data. I describe the process of aggregation, selection, and annotation. 

...

Besides the technicalities that led to the results, it also matters for me to present the personal circumstances and the challenges that surrounded the work. I believe this approach enriches the text and promotes the engagement of my reader. But to make this optional, anything non-technical will have a **Personal:** label and will be written in *italic* characters.


## Objectives

Dentists keep records of the state and progress of each patient. One process through which these records are structured is the creation of dental charts. These charts are graphical representations of the 32 types of human permanent teeth labelled according to a specific nomenclature. In dental charts each tooth can be assigned with a set of attributes that are either pathologies or restorations. The nomenclature used for labelling teeth in this project is FDI.

Dental charts used to be done on paper. Nowadays several software options are available for dentists. Some of them include speech control to enable vocal dictation. Despite its advances, the process remains slow and very redundant, and several dentists have started to look for solutions to accelerate it.

Research targetting the application of computer vision on this problem has achieved considerable results. Different methods have been applied with great success and led to the release of powerful software to assist dentists. My employer was interested in the implementation of a competing solution. Having previously developed a software that enabled the creation of dental charts through typing or voice control, they felt they could do better. They recruited me for this purpose.

**Personal:** *At the time of my recruitment I had nearly exhausted my hopes of ever finding employment. I had graduated from my master's with very poor grades, couldn't find visa sponsoring work abroad, and couldn't find open positions in my country. Because of this, I suffered from low self-esteem and frail mental health.* 

*Perhaps from fear of disappointing more than from sincerety, I tested my own competences before proceding with the job interview. In other words, I evaluated myself to see if it was worth letting others evaluate me. My anxiety wouldn't settle otherwise.*

*I was successful in implementing a Resnet to classify dental images based on the presence of tooth decay. I presented this work to my employer and gained their approval. Previous lurkings on Kaggle made me aware of the availability of [the dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/pushkar34/teeth-dataset) towards which I owe my success in being able to secure my first job.*

*Despite this small success, my low self-esteem was still in charge. I kept asking my employer during the interview whether I will be assisted in this position. Whether dentists will provide the required data. These questions were answered with affirmation. Not long after, I realized I was the only person recruited to do the whole work. The whole work, including the annotation of data.*

The objectives in their order of execution were:
1. Detecting and classifying the 32 types of permanent teeth.
2. Detecting and classifying attributes that a tooth can have:
    - Implants.
    - Crowns attached to implants. 
    - Bridges and their components (pillars and pontics).
    - Missing teeth, including cases in which orthodontic treatments extracted a tooth and closed the gap between its two adjacent teeth.
    - Endodontic treatments. Otherwise known as root canals.
    - Caries.
3. Processing the outputs of the first and second objectives in a cohesive description that associated attributes to their assigned tooth.

Unlike this list, the reality was unstructured. Initially the objectives were described in very broad terms, we did not know what would be feasible. They continued to grow in ambition and complexity relative to the results I was delivering. 

## Data Annotation

I was provided with a dataset of around 16000 dental X-rays. The dataset was limited to images of panoramic radiographs and did not contain any ground truth. My accelerated course on the field of dentistry was done during a 30 minute call with my employer's partner. By the end of the conversation, I was deemed ready for my first task: detecting and classifying teeth according to the FDI notation.

**Personal:** *I was under lots of pressure. Every tooth is unique. Human teeth differ in size and shape from one person to another. I could not define a single rule for which I did not find a plethora of exceptions.* 

*Not all canines are elongated and pointy. Molars are not always bigger than premolars. The four mandibular incisors all look the same more often than not... The position of a tooth is a nice indicator, but relative to what? Another tooth? So much for help, many thanks.*

*Part of my confusion was caused by a frame of mind that was trying to solve the problem. This is a problem for which solutions can only be approximated. With extensive research, a couple all-nighters, and barrels of coffee and tea, I tuned my human model to analyze x-rays. Part of the tuning was letting go of perfection. Expert dentists make frequent errors classifying a tooth from an image cropped out of its context. Which means that teeth do not carry (pun totally unintended) inherent visual properties that are reliable enough to distinguish them with high precision. This is especially the case between teeth of the same families: the 12 molars, 8 premolars, 4 canines, 8 incisors. 

Context, position, neighbors, are manifestations of the same idea that will come back again and again But wait, I just mentioned the word context. 

The reasonable way to proceed was to confront my employer with the evidence: a Data Scientist cannot do Dentist*
